#Global Biodiversity Scenarios for the Year 2100
####By Osvaldo E.S., F. Stuart Chapin III, Juan J.A., Eric B., Janine B., Rodolfo D., Elisabeth H.S., Laura F.H., Robert B.J., Ann K., Rik L., David M.L., Harold A.M., Martin O., N. LeRoy Poff, Martin T.S., Brian H.W., Marilyn W., Diana H.W. (10 March 2000)
#####Written by Bryce Fenlon

##Summary
The final goal for this article was to present three different scenarios for biodiversity in the year 2100. In order to go about doing this, the researchers first identified five major determinants for global-scale biodiverity change in ten terrestrial biomes and freshwater ecosystems. These five drivers were changes in land use, atmospheric carbon dioxide concentration, nitrogen deposition and acid rain, climate, and biotic exchanges. Then, after calculating the expected changes of each of these drivers over the next century in each biome, the authors estimated the impact that a unit change in each factor would have. In relation to the rest of the drivers - and independant of biome - changes in land use will have the largest effect on biodiversity, followed by climate, nitrogen deposition, biotic exchange, and atmospheric carbon dioxide concentration. The authors also provided an exhaustive comparison for each driver as to which biomes would be impacted and to what degree (small, moderate, and large), but I will not cover that here. Freshwater ecosystems were examined separately from terrestrial biomes, and they show a relatively more important weight given to biotic exchange and land use due to coopting of freshwater resources by humans, as well as close cohabitation, on a global scale. In examining the terrestrial ecosystems, three unique but similar approaches were used. The first assumed no interactions among the five causes of change examined here. Biodiversity of Mediterranean and grassland ecosystems, according to this scenario, will be most sensitive to change while arctic, desert, and alpine biomes will show only moderate responses (regional differences determine specific responses). The second biodiversity scenario assumed that antagonistic relationships between drivers exist and that only the one with the greatest impact will determine diversity. By this assumption, tropical and southern temperate forest biomes will display substantial changes in biodiversity because of land-use change, and in the arctic due to climate change. Because desert and alpine ecosystems have no particularly strong driver of biodiversity change, they will show the least amount of change. The last case assumes synergistic relationships between the causes of change. Consequently Mediterranean and grassland biomes show the greatest change due to their large aggregate sensitivities for the drivers of biodiversity change while the converse is true for tropical forest, arctic, and alpine ecosystems. 

##Things you liked
Far and beyond their original goal of providing various biodiversity scenarios for 2100, the researchers revealed a deeper flaw in those prediction strategems. Although primarily this article serves as a biodiversity prediction, it also accomplishes a secondary purpose of displaying model sensitivity to assumptions about the interactions between governors of biodiversity change. They also point out that further research investigating those assumptions is necessary in order to improve predictions.

##Things you did not like
Incorporating such a multitude of biomes and ranked change in biodiversity under three distinct assumptions is somewhat overwhelming. Although the methodology is clear and the information is presented in a manner fitting the wide variety of data, it would have been made magnitudes of order simpler by incorporating direct explanations of the graphics in the paper. This is not common in scientific papers, but all of the different rankings of data (variation across biomes and variation across drivers) were jumbled around in my head until I parsed them with the graphs.

##Evaluation of figures
The figures in this paper were separated into three groups. The first is a set of tables that convey both changes in the drivers of biodiversity for the year 2100, as well as how a unit change in each driver affects each biome. The second set is a collection of graphs displaying (visually) the relative effects of each driver on biodiversity both independantly and dependantly of biome. The final set is of three comprehensive maps displaying one each of the three different terrestrial biodiversity scenarios, color coded by intensity of change. 
