#Decoupling of taxonomic and ecologic severity of Phanerozoic marine mass extinctions
####By Droser M.L., Bottjer D.J., Sheehan P.M., and McGhee G.R. Jr. (August 2000)
#####Written by Bryce Fenlon

##Summary
By defining a qualitative scale for measuring the ecological change, the authors made it possible to decouple taxonomic and ecological impacts between the Late Ordovician and Late Devonian mass extinctions. The scale itself is composed of four levels, each more specific than the last. The first represents ecosystem appearance or disappearance, and is measured in the fossil record by the initial colonization of an environment. The second level looks at structural changes within ecosystems such as change in ecological dominance or appearance of higher taxa, the loss or appearance of metazoan reefs, and the appearance or disappearance of Bambachian megaguilds. At a finer scale still is the third level of change, this time within fixed ecosystem structures. It is marked by the appearance or disappearance of community types, change in hierarchical complexity within ecosystems, and the filling or thinning out of Bambachian megaguilds. Finally, the last qualitative level of ecological change is at the community level itself. This includes the loss or advent of individual communities, as well as changes in clade taxonomic composition.

After these levels were constructed, the researchers contrasted the Late Ordovician and Late Devonian mass extinctions. Their initial findings show that while the Late Ordovician extinction only incurred third and fourth level changes, the Late Devonian had second, third, and fourth level changes. The underlying implication of this set of results, in combination with family-level loss data, is two-fold. Firstly, the Late Ordovician mass extinction had a larger taxonomic impact than that of the Late Devonian. Second, the Late Devonian extinction had an extreme and disastrous effect on metazoan reefs which led to gross ecosystem structural change; a second level ecological change. Also included in this study is another distinct paradigm for analyzing ecological impact. This other way of looking at the problem uses an analytic study performed by Sepkoski and Miller from 1985, and maps time-environment change over geologic time with respect to the bathymetric gradient. Faunal reversal between modern and Paleozoic evolutionary fauna can be seen at the Devonian extinction in this way, but not at the Ordovician. Thus it can be concluded that the Late Ordovician mass extinction was not registered by the distribution of marine species. This separate but similar way of viewing ecological versus taxonomic change adds to the previous analysis presented in the paper. The general conclusion that can be drawn from the synthesis of this data is that some taxa – dominant and keystone species in the context of mass extinction – are more important for retaining ecosystem structure. 

##Things you liked
The construction of a qualitative system for determining ecological impact and change is an interesting premise for other investigations. For example, by using quantitative first and last appearance datums in the determination of extinction impact over geologic time, the analysis could become more objective. Other methods could examine the rate of recovery (faunal turnover between Paleozoic and modern fauna or between Cambrian and Paleozoic fauna) in relation to species diversity or disparity change.

##Things you did not like
A more thorough investigation of gross taxonomic change could have been included in the paper. While the differences in taxonomic diversity between geologic periods was touched on multiple times, “decoupling” would imply equal treatment of both taxonomic and ecologic severity seen in mass extinctions. The premise of the study was that no comprehensive study of ecological impact of extinction comparable to past works concentrating on taxonomy had yet been performed. However, a more detailed juxtaposition of the two would have been helpful in understanding the significance of the conclusions. 

##Evaluation of figures
The figures presented in this study are both concise and quite easy to interpret. The first is a table summarizing the authors’ qualitative scale levels, their definitions, and how their signals in the fossil record. The second is slightly more involved, but just as relevant. It is a depiction of the spatial and temporal distribution of Cambrian, Paleozoic, and modern evolutionary faunas. This serves as a corollary to the impacted ecological levels of the qualitative scale by visualizing the change in organism distribution along a bathymetric gradient over geologic time. 
