#Determinants of extinction in the fossil record
###Shanan E. Peters and Michael Foote (2002)
#####Written by Bryce Fenlon

##Summary
Key to investigations of the rock record are correlations between the availability of rock and events percieved by paleobiologists. More specifically, extinction and the corresponding loss of biodiversity in the fossil record are of interest in that they provide an ideal set of data to test a model's prediction accuracy. Extinctions are often percieved in the rock record because of poor preservation in the subsequent stage, leading to an artificially inflated rate of extinction in the stage with these "last" occurrences; the Holland effect at work. The converse is also true, stages with better preservation are often preceded by lower extinction rates because they were able to capture a higher amount of "true" extinctions; a corollary to the Signor-Lipps effect. The cumulative effect of these spurious occurrences is an offset introduced to predictions of preservation potential based on rock availability. By comparing the relationship between instantaneous extinction rates by stage and their updated estimate of exposed marine sedimentary rock, Peters and Foote were able to show that change in the observed extinction rate (per genus per million years) correlated to the change in the number of exposed formations (r=0.238, P=0.056). Moreover, when a time lag of one stage (first differences) was introduced to account for the previously explained offset, the correlation became much stronger and the significance much greater (r=-0.471, P<0.0001). However, to more fully explain the relationship of the amount of rock to extinction rate it was necesary to use a model which assumed that departures from smooth variations in observed extinction rates throughout the fossil record are at least partly due to heterogeneity in the process of preservation. In order to test the significance of this model, two null distributions were drawn from 2000 model-data correlation coefficients based on either constant extinction rates and stage lengths or on declining extinction rates and variable stage lengths. The observed correlation coefficients were completely outside of both of these null distributions (P<0.0005), indicating that the model is able to predict variation in extinction rate - based on the amount of exposed rock - to a certain extent with statistical significance. Although this research does not serve as an absolute determinant for extinction rates, it does allow for statistical prediction of the volatility introduced to these rates by variable preservation. It also has implications for interpreting evolutionary patterns throughout the Phanerozoic eon.

##Things you liked
The implication that this model can be incorporated into existing models should not be overlooked. By adjusting for the changing amount of exposed rock in adjacent stages when calculating rates of extinction, the error of the stage to stage biodiversity loss estimation goes down. Although it is probably only a marginal decrease, improving on models of the deep past is the best way to understand on a broad scale how the biosphere will change in the future. Possibly with applications to climate change models. Our planet goes through cycles on scales most of us can barely comprehend, and we're starting to tamper with them. It probably wouldn't hurt to know how human acceleration will affect their amplitude. On a side note, will we all go extinct when the moon tidally locks with Earth in 50 billion years, assuming we're even around or care about such mortal concerns? That's probably not in the fossil record.

##Things you did not like
Although it was discussed in the methods section, the difference in correlations between the data from within the United States and from outside could have used more explanation. It makes sense that they might be different because of quality or accuracy of the measurements, however it would have been nice to know the precise reason why the correlation was nearly half as strong as using only the U.S. data. In addition, the p-values for these statistics were separated by a factor of ten, and this too could have benefited from further elaboration.

##Evaluation of figures
The first figure in a series of four looked at the relationship between the observed time series for extinction rate and the time series of the number of formations. It also included detrended correspondance graphs, both with and without a lag of one stage in the first differences. The second figure compared the observed extinction rate to the model extinction rate based on either constant stage lengths and extinction rates or on variable stage lengths and declining extinction rates. In addition, figure two also had two first difference graphs. One looked at observed extinction rate to model extinction rate first differences by stage and the other at first differences by lineage per million years. The third figure is a table of product-moment correlations for the DCA between empirical and predicted extinction rates with varying model assumptions. Lastly, the graph of the two null distributions based on the model-data correlation coefficients was also included.
