#How good was the fossil record? Clues from the Californian Pleistocene
###By James W. Valentine (18 January 1989)
#####Written by Bryce Fenlon

##Summary
The question of exactly how well living associations are preserved in the fossil record has been around since the days of Darwin. Many problems exist with determining this, such as knowing the pool of potentially fossilizable species from which a fossil assemblage is formed, time averaging, and mode of fossilization to name a few. In this study, Valentine combines multiple common approaches in order to refine his logic. The first type of study discussed was that of using contemporary fauna to estimate or observe the way that fossilizable skeletons are recruited into dead assemblages. In research such as this the composition of the dead assemblages is often found to be fairly representative of the more fossilizable species that currently inhabit the environment. This particular article used a pool of 698 living species (201 genera; 113 families) in the Bivalvia and Gastropoda classes. The second type of study examined here deals with fossilized fauna and the consequent interpretations of their completeness and overall time averaging (period of accumulation). Utilizing the same pool of 113 families, Valentine created a comparison pool of 747 fossilized molluscan species (morphospecies only) restricted to the past one million years by uranium series and amino-acid racemization ages. The last sort of studies that were mentioned are quantitative assessments of the resolution of the fossil record (both biologically and lithographically). Of the species identified in each pool, 536 were present in both. This shows a relative similarity to each other of 77% and 72% of the living and fossil fauna respectively. To couch it in different terms, 162 of the currently living species could not be identified in the Californian Province as fossils whereas 211 fossil species did not have a modern counterpart in the province. Of these 211 species, 98 are extinct, 72 live to the south, and 41 species live to the north. This change in location over countless generations is indicative of a departure from modern climatic and/or thermal conditions. With regard to the living species missing from the fossil record, most tend to be small, thin shelled, or from habitats on the outer edge of the continental shelf. In the discussion and general implication sections, the author brings up two key points addressing the viability of the fossil record, the first being that with increased sampling we can expect to see a marginal rise in the amount of species in the sample (diminishing returns). This has implications with respect to rare species, as their discovery is contingent upon the intensity of sampling. The second - and perhaps more important - of the points is that the fossil record is not incomplete due to lack of accumulation, but rather due to its deterioration and stochastic nature of its preservation over millions of years of that record.

##Things you liked
One thing that stood out to me in this article was the use of living fauna in determining the accuracy of the fossil record. Not only that, but using those data points in conjunction with records up to one million years old presents me - and probably many others - with a cognitive dissonance of sorts. Using 'new' to justify 'old' seems counterintuitive, but when presented with no other options paleontologists came up with an ingenious solution. 

##Things you did not like
Although Valentine mentions that a the amount of species shared between the two pools is likely to increase about 10% through another round of sampling, there was no effort to test this. Although sampling is oftentimes expensive, for the purpose of the study it would have been extremely beneficial to collect additional samples. Perhaps even near to the original sample locations in order to empirically determine if original sampling missed some species. Sampling close to the original locations, however, would delimit the degree of independence between samples and would thus only be useful in determining accuracy of sampling (they could not be used to draw conclusions from in this study).

##Evaluation of figures
There were two figures in this paper - as well as an appendix listing all 113 families and their amount of live and fossilized species. The first graphical summary was a simple map of the localities mentioned in the text. The other figure in the body of the text was a tabulation of the living pool of molluscs, subsetted by class (Gastropoda, Bivalvia) and heirarchical level (family, genus, species).
