#Cenozoic latitudinal response curves: individualistic changes in the latitudinal distributions of marine bivalves and gastropods
####By Andrew A. Zaffos and Arnold I. Miller

##Summary
The goal of this paper was to determine the efficacy of previous research postulating poleward expansion of marine bivalve and gastropod genera during the Cenozoic era. Four central questions were posed and answered in the article. Firstly, the researchers investigated the overarching question of whether or not an observable pattern of migration actually exists. Through Guassian logistic regression, Zaffos and Miller estimated preferred latitude and latitudinal tolerance parameters for each genus across Cenozoic time intervals (both stages and epochs). Contingent upon these parameters is whether or not the changes observed correlate with the reconstructed latitudinal gradient for genus distribution, and a bootstrapping procedure which compared 1000 reshuffled response curve parameter comparisons across genera was used for this purpose. For all that statistical work (magic?), the conclusion drawn from the analyses was rather anticlimactic in that it showed no definitive proof of any long-term equator or poleward expansion of marine bivalve and gastropod genera throughout the Cenozoic. The second hypothesis tested by this article was whether latitudinal migration was due to range expansion or a shift in the center of the population distribution. They concluded that although there was notable expansion into higher latitudes, the center of the distribution remained in the tropics. The reasoning behind this being that congeneric "bridge species" near the limit of tolerance for a species will - at the same time as expanding to the extratropics - move to higher latitudes as well as continue to live in the tropics from whence they came. Thirdly, Zaffos and Miller tested the proportion of large to small changes in latitude across three temporal resolutions. In doing so, they found a statistically significant difference between preferred latitude shifts and changes in tolerance level, suggesting a slight tendency for genera to move the center of their distribution rather then widening it through latitudinal expansion. However, because the difference did not arise at the stage level and the magnitude of said difference is quite small, the researchers discounted this as evidence for poleward migration. Lastly, there is an inherent fourth line of inquiry into the nature of possible changes in rate for the observed shifts of population distributions due to environmental (biotic and abiotic) perturbations. They found that while major disruptions to equatorial ecology did occur in the time frame being examined, the consistency shown in the hollow curve distributions across temporal resolutions indicate the robust nature of these biogeographical systems and their distributions of genera on geologic time scales. 

##Things you liked
The implication that this research can be applied to contemporary problems of species extirpation and extinction due to climate change is profound. Although distinct parallels between the two would be impossible to draw, the sampling and analytical methodologies are generally applicable. A caveat to this, however, is human existence. On evolutionary timescales homosapiens are an incredibly young species, yet our presence on the Earth has been unabashedly destructive. To assume that species who have adapted over the course of thousands of years in more or less stable conditions (with an ice age or two) can simply move elsewhere is absurdly naïve. The rapid industrial and technological development in the past 500 years has yet to show its full impact in terms of climate forcing (due to delays induced by ocean, ice sheets, etc.), and continued modification will only exacerbate the situation in another 500 years when it finally catches up to us. In other words, while the methods from this paper may be applicable to modern day examinations of species or genus movement, the human factor needs to be taken into account if accurate forecasts are to be drawn. 

##Things you did not like
The statistical methodology, at least for me, was somewhat out of my depth. Although after some research into logistic regression and various types of distributions I did develop a basic understanding of the principles behind them. Additionally, while the introduction referenced a 2011 paper by Zaffos and Holland to introduce the statistical methodology, the particulars were left to the reader to determine through supplementary reading. Although this is minor, and the statistics were reviewed, excising that statistical outline from the other paper and putting it in the introduction might have been more effective.

##Evaluation of figures
The figures displayed in this research article consisted of two different types. The first was an array of small graphs representing shared taxa within each combination of Cenozoic epochs. The regression lines indicate poleward expansion (if the line is near unity with a strong correlation coefficient) or lack thereof. Also, this set of graphs was given for both preferred latitude and latitudinal tolerance. The second set of graphs consists of shifts in both latitudinal tolerance and preferred latitude normalized as a percentage across both stages and epochs. Each graph is a hollow curve, indicating that the largest number of shifts were small ones, and that the smallest number of shifts were large ones.
