#The influence of lithification on Cenozoic marine biodiversity trends
###Austin J. W. Hendy
#####Written by Bryce Fenlon

##Summary
In this article, Hendy explores the ubiquitous problem of bias within the fossil record. More specifically he investigates the importance of lithification on the preservation of fossils, and the consequent paleontological interpretations. Before delving into the meat and potatoes of his methods, results, and conclusions a brief overview of alpha diversity is in order. This term refers to within community diversity, and many previous studies have utilized it as a proxy for aggregate biodiversity change from interval to interval. However, these other studies have failed to account for key biases in the fossil record such as ease of sampling from unlithified sediments, preservational biases, or sampling heterogeneities. The last bias (sampling heterogeneity) is often controlled for by using sample-standardization techniques such as rarefaction (number of species as a function of the number of samples), which is used in the analyses presented in this paper. Having touched on alpha diversity, let us dive in. The samples gathered for this study originate in the Wanganui and East Coast sedimentary basins of New Zealand, and consist of 169 samples across a range of lithification levels. These levels were classified as unlithified, poorly lithified, and lithified depending on individual specimens' ease of removal - or lack thereof - from the surrounding matrix. The collection, preparation, counting and identification were kept as constant as possible, but did vary somewhat from sample to sample due to the specific nature of sedimentation in that locality. For each sample multiple replicates were obtained, two to three hundred individual specimens were collected, and each was restricted to mollusc and brachiopod dominated transgressive shell beds to control for variations in time-averaging and paleoenvironment. The collected samples composed the abundance data for the study, while presence-absence data containing lithification classification for each data point was gleaned from the NZ Fossil Record File (FRF) database. In analyzing the data, several different approaches were taken in order to form a comprehensive assessment of change in brachiopod and mollusc biodiversity across various sample subsets. In particular, the early and late Pliocene were of interest because direct comparison between contemporaneous lithification gradations was possible. For each lithification grade, time interval, and a combination of both time and lithification the mean richness values were determined (FRF data could not be standardized because individual taxon abundance was not available) and submitted to nonparametric Kolmogorov-Smirnov tests and parametric t-tests to look for statistical significance between lithification levels. In addition, minerology and individual specimen size data was collected to assess the impact that minerology and robustness have on individual specimen preservation. In his analyses, Hendy constructed rarefaction curves showing a clear distinction between unlithified and lithified sediments (average of nineteen and slightly less than eight, respectively) while minimizing other possible biases such as sampling heterogeneties, actual biodiversity change, and time-averaging to name a few. He found that the previously observed biodiversity increase in the late Neogene occurs concurrently with a decrease in lithification grade, and both mean and max richness for unlithified sediments were four times greater than lithified ones. Overall, he posited that up to half of the assumed three to fourfold increase in biodiversity can be connected to increasing availability of unlithified sediments, and that macroevolutionary alpha diversity trends account for the remainder. Further, he postulates that preservational bias imposed by lithification is at least as great as biases related to aragonitic dissolution, latitudinal distribution, and paleoenvironmental conditions.

##Things you liked
I was surprised at Hendy's ability to differentiate in the statistical analyses between the various biases operating to preserve the fossil beds of interest. However this should be qualified with the statement that I am not - and will not protend to be - a paleontologist who understands how these biases affect statistics. Also, the clarity of the graphs in the paper was quite refreshing in relation to figures in past articles.

##Things you did not like
Diametrically opposed to what I found appealing, I was left questioning *how* Hendy managed to discern between preservational biases. It would have been useful for a more in depth methodology concerning how he smoothed them from the rarefaction curves, if indeed that is what he did. Perhaps a more apt way to phrase this would be *when* exactly he applied these assumptions in the analyses. For the most part I was satisfied with the breadth of the conclusions, but the depth was a little shallow.

##Evaluation of figures
The first set of figures in the article showed two comparisons of global diversity in relation to lithification data. These correlated increase in availability of unlithified sediment with biodiversity increase in the past 200 million years or so. Somewhat related to these are the next set of graphs displaying negative correlations between hardness values and genus richness, utilizing both line graphs and stacked bar plots (with error). Rarefaction curves, both aggregate and mean, were present to show the stark difference between unlithified and lithified generic richness. One data table was present, showing lithification grades in relation to genus [unstandardized] richness from both the sample sites and the FRF. The final set of figures were two bar graphs representing the percent of genera across lithification grades with respect to the minerology and specimen size data sets mentioned in the summary.
