#Origination, extinction, and mass depletions of marine diversity
###By Bambach, R.K., Knoll, A.H., and Wang, S.C. (2004)
#####Written by Bryce Fenlon

##Summary
This article was an investigation into whether or not mass extinctions that are often referred to as the “big five” are indeed separate in cause, effect, and magnitude from underlying background extinctions. These five intervals – the late Frasnian, end Triassic, end Ordovician, end Permian, and end Cretaceous – are better regarded as simply mass depletions (>13.5% generic loss) of diversity than a distinct class of events. Of those big five, the researchers concluded that three of them – the end Ordovician, end Permian, and end Cretaceous – could, in fact, be considered as separate in cause, magnitude, and effect. They relied mainly on outside sources for proving distinctions in cause and effect, and focused on analyzing magnitude throughout the majority of the paper. It should be noted that in the other two the depletions of biodiversity resulted from reduced rates of origination, and not elevated extinction levels like the others.
In order to see if these “big five” were indeed separate, the researchers formed a distribution of extinction intensity magnitudes for 107 Phanerozoic intervals. They tested it in two ways. The first was a simple test of continuity to see if there was strong variation in the upper tail for both the entire Phanerozoic and for after the “Cambrian Plateau” of high genus turnover. The second was a comparison of extinction magnitudes for each of those intervals against the distribution of extinction magnitudes for the time segment which the interval is a part of. In a subsequent time-adjusted analysis of 88 post-Arenig intervals, a lowess curve with a bandwidth of 11% (takes extinction intensities of surrounding intervals into account) was used to smooth out the noise. Using this, the researchers found statistically significant (p = 0.028) evidence of bimodal extinction intensity magnitude distribution; presence of a second mode in the right tail of the distribution. Combining all the outliers of the first two tests and the intervals present in the second mode of the bimodal distribution, they concluded that only three of the informally recognized “big five” extinctions qualify as true global mass extinction events.
