#The Red Queen and the Court Jester: Species Diversity and the Role of Biotic and Abiotic Factors Through Time
###Michael J. Benton (2009)
#####Written by Bryce Fenlon

> 10/10

##Summary
Evolution, depending on who you talk to, can be viewed either through the lense of the Court Jester or the Red Queen model. The Red Queen diversification hypothesis emphasizes the role of competition, predation, and biotic factors; intrinsic characteristics. On the other hand, the Court Jester model focuses on the role of extrinsic conditions such as climate and tectonics when looking at evolution and diversity. Furthermore, biotic pressures act on species diversity across relatively short timescales (up to 100,000 years) and local geographies, and external factors play a more important role across larger scales. Two different types of models have been used to show these two different concepts. The first set - saturation/equilibrium models - differ in the timing of saturation of the marine biome as well as the amount of equilibria throughout the ages. These model a typical Red Queen scenario, in which competition is the main driver behind evolution and diversity change. The second type are expansionist models that predict a dampened, but for the most part limitless, rise in diversity. While not explicitly stated, this type implies that stochastic events and abiotic factors are the prime determinant in biodiversity decline, a characteristic of the Court Jester model. Benton describes these two systems by comparing the diversity in the seas to a Red Queen model of and on land to the damped exponential rise characterized by the Court Jester system of thought. Benton goes on to discuss taxic paleobiological evidence of abiotic factors affecting species diversity. A popular topic is the relationship of energy and diversity, specifically the latitudinal diversity gradient and the higher biodiversity of the tropics (characterized either by the time-area hypothesis or the diversification rate hypothesis). Through the study of phylogenetic trees, the timing - not just the presence or absence - of diversification events can be determined. If, when looking at diversification shifts, they are coordinated and linked to particular abiotic changes, then the Court Jester hypothesis would win out. However, if diversification shifts are unique to a clade and do not co-occur with other shifts, then it may be a Red Queen situation. It should be mentioned that neither of these hypotheses is mutually exclusive, and they interact across geologic time. After discussing the utility of phylogenetic studies for looking at diversification shifts, Benton then looks into how they are being utilized to test the resource-use hypothesis. It posits that specialist clades are more speciose and have shorter species durations than generalists. This is supported by analyzing clades that have both extinct and extant taxa. The conclusion of this article was rather vague, and only states that the Court Jester and Red Queen models are scale-dependent and future utilizaiton of phylogenetics will allow for the study of clade dynamics and the formation of novel characteristics or species.

##Things I liked
It was refreshing to avoid statistically heavy methods and results sections. I feel that the major goal of this literature review was to provide sound rationale and contemporary evidence for these somewhat abstract models. Moreover, it sought to procure insight into how best to approach evolution from a phylogenetic analysis perspective instead of from a taxic one. Overall, the paper synthesized ideas well and provided sound reasoning for all the points presented therein.

##Things I did not like
The conclusion of the whole thing, at least to me, seemed kind of vague. Yes, both of the models can be purported as true, just at different time scales. Yes, we see the application of these models in previous studies. However, there was a very limited part of the paper that discussed these models in relation to each other. I would like to have seen additional information on how and to what extent the two interact to influence each other. It goes without saying that biotic interactions can hold sway over some abiotic forces. When oxygen first started to appear due to photosynthetic bacteria, there were major implications for weathering and climate. The opposite is also true, conditionally. Abiotic forces such as orogeny and Milankovich cycles have great effects on species distributions and abundances, as well as on possible niche spaces.

##Evaluation of figures
The three figures and the table contained in this review all draw from materials Benton references. The first figure is a simple visual depiction of how each model operates across various environmental, geographic, and temporal scales. The next is a graph of species diversity through time (unaltered and corrected). The only table in this article lists characteristics of the Red Queen, Court Jester, and multilevel mixed models. The last figure visualizes the morphospaces in a PCA graph for Late Triassic archosaurs as well as a time-scaled phylogeny looking at crurotarsan and dinosaur lineages.
