#The effect of geographic range on extinction risk during background and mass extinction
###Payne, J.L., and Finnegan, S. (2007)
#####Written by Bryce Fenlon

##Summary
Many studies of the fossil record have revolved around the mechanistic processes underlying extinction, and it has been shown that the causes of extinction are often context specific. Determining causality or overall trends, however, has been extremely difficult. And most have looked only at particular mass extinction events. Here, Payne and Finnegan look at geographic range and its effect on survivorship regimes between mass and background extinctions. In order to test this proposed relationship, the researchers did a couple different things. The first methodology employed was the creation of log-odds for genus survivorship to geographic range within each of the 47 intervals under study. Using single regression, 44 showed a significant relationship between the two. By utilizing multiple regression to mitigate the effects of both species richness and the number of global occurrences, they found that neither has as great of an impact on extinction risk as geographic range. Both have statistically insignificant effects in this comparison. The second way that the researchers looked at the data investigated the accuracy of these results in the context of other, potentially confounding, elements. In order to control for sampling heterogeneity, Payne and Finnegan compared odds ratios to five variables. These were the number of occurrences, number of tectonic plates, global sea level, number of named formations, and the proportion of "range through" genera. Range through meaning those genera sampled in directly adjacent intervals, but not in the interval itself. The only variable showing significance at an alpha value of 0.05 and that explains more than ten percent of the log-odds variation is the number of tectonic plates. This, for various reasons associated with intensity of sampling around mass extinctions, was not considered to be statistically significant after further analysis. The researchers found that a weak negative correlation between extinction intensity and log-odds exists due to increased sensitivity to geographic range when per-plate extinction intensity is low. As extinction rate increases, individual differences in genus geographic ranges have smaller effects on their extinction risks. Overall, they showed that even after controlling for multiple factors, geographic range was important in determining generic extinction risk. Through the use of a null model that assumed no ecological or physiological effects between genera on extinction risk, they found that it overlapped the odds ratios in 20 of the intervals. The deviations from this model indicate variance in extinction risk among genera. Payne and Finnegan concluded that, at least in the marine fossil record, geographic range is an important predictor for extinction risk separate from other factors. 

##Things you liked
I continue to be impressed at just how much scientists doubt their own conclusions, even going to extensive lengths in order to bring an element of doubt to their conclusions. While I do not particularly *enjoy* the investigation into possible factors affecting preservation quality, I do appreciate it. Not to mention that it helped to reinforce their explanation that measuring extinction and geographic range within intervals mitigated possible sampling heterogeneity.

##Things you did not like
A more thorough discussion of the exact measure of geographic range size could have been included. To me it seemed a little vague, and they never specifically defined how they were using the term. I am fairly certain it has to do with the amount of named formations, but again, I do not know for sure. It would have benefited their methodology to include an explanation in the text as to how they created this metric. Other than this minor observation it was an informative article. 

##Evaluation of figures
Along with various equations for odds ratios and log-odds, there was one table and three graphs. The singular table shows the results of the comparison between geographic range selectivity and changes in the five metrics the researchers used to investigate record quality. The first graph is a visual representation of both the single and the multiple regression analyses performed across the entirety of the Phanerozoic. The second is a scatterplot of interval-specific extinction intensities compared to geographic range selectivity (log-odds). The last graph is also a scatterplot - this time with point size being dependent on extinction intensity - comparing the observed log-odds to the null model predicted log-odds.




