#Has the Earth's sixth mass extinction already arrived?
###Barnosky, A.D., Matzke, N., Tomiya, S., Wogan, G.O.U, Swartz, B., Quental, T.B., Marshall, C., McGuire, J.L., Lindsey, E.L., Maguire, K.C., Mersey, B., and Ferrer, E.A.
#####Written by Bryce Fenlon
##Summary
Analyses of modern extinction rates and how they compare to mass extinctions from the past are of great interest to conservation biologists and paleobiologists alike. Although only three of the 'Big Five' show significantly elevated extinction rates, for the purposes of this review all five are considered for their proportional biodiversity loss. There is a set of problems that come with studying modern extinctions, however. While we know roughly how many species are present on Earth today, there is likely some small fraction that we have yet to document. Additionally, less than three percent of known extant species have been evaluated for their inherent extinction risk at present. This all goes without saying that there may have been some species that went extinct that we simply never knew about. Putting these difficulties aside, the researchers decided to use a conservative paleontological definition of 75% or greater species loss (resulting from disparities in extinction and origination rates) to correspond to a mass extinction event. Comparing extant to extinct species dynamics is quite tricky. Problems arise because the time scale from which we have data for modern extinctions is so fine compared to the extent of paleontological data that the variability for extrapolated extinction rates is extremely large. However, when looking at mammals between the two, the researchers concluded three things. Maximum observed rates for the recent are far above average, recent rates are also high compared to pre-industrial levels, and when taking into account the probable extinctions of endangered and threatened species the rate rises far above the upper bound for variation due to interval length. They also compared recent (extrapolated) rates to past intervals of only 500 years, and found that when controlling intervals to match, there are statistically higher rates of extinction now than there were millions of years ago surrounding mass extinction events. Barnosky *et al* also looked at differences in magnitude. Upon doing so, they found that for well documented groups the extinction magnitude in modern times is quite low (around 1%). Compared to the total extinction magnitudes of mass extinctions this is only a drop in the bucket. Although these conclusions are nothing to scoff at, the real implications are apparent when combining the two. First, by considering threatened species to be basically extinct and mass extinctions all happen suddenly, the current 500 year extinction rate approaches that of the 'Big Five'. Looking at it a different way, if all the threatened species die within a century then extinction magnitudes would rise to the 75% mark in less than 300 years. Two other scenarios consider the extinctions of these still extant species over longer time periods, but their conclusions are similar (just over a longer period of time). In general, the researchers conclude that their results must be qualified by a multitude of factors including, but not limited to, the survival probabilities of currently threatened species, compensating for differences between the fossil record and modern species, and their applicability to other areas (i.e. marine realms) and clades. Moreover, we are currently on the precipice of the sixth mass extinction, and we would do well to realize that.

##Things I liked
Being of the conservation biology breed, I find this kind of study extremely useful for modern studies of anthropogenic activities that threaten the environment. More than that, though, is its inherent utility for finding methods to combat rapid species loss and ecologic degradation. A lot of fatalists would have you believe that the sixth mass extinction is thoroughly underway, and yet they usually do not reference any sort of literature. The only way to empirically determine that fact is to look into the past, where we *know* that there were mass extinctions. Anything else is pure conjecture based off of the spotlight being placed on certain species that are held in high esteem because of cultural history or moral qualms. 

##Things I did not like
For the most part, the only thing that was off-putting in this review was the complexity of the figures. When the explanations - for what should be easily conveyed visual information - for a figure are longer than that page's text, my eyes get listless. This was the case for figures 1 and 2, and to be perfectly honest I glossed over them. The researchers would have benefited from more concisely conveyed information in their figures.

##Evaluation of figures
The two tables and three figures of this paper were quite information dense, and required almost as much time to understand as to read the body of the article. Also included was an inset that covered the problems associated with data comparisons across such disparate intervals of time. The first table is an introduction to the causes, magnitudes, and rates of the popular 'Big Five' extinction events. The second discusses the methods and variations in those methodologies for comparing past extinctions to the present levels of biodiversity depletion. The initial figure (the one with the long explanation) compares extinction per million species-years (E/MSY) to the time interval in which it was measured. The second looks at extant taxa and their extinction magnitudes with regard to the 75% benchmark when including currently threatened species in the calculations. The last figure is also the easiest to interpret at a glance, and it is a comparison of extinction magnitude to E/MSY. It also includes the hypothetical scenarios for threatened and endangered species, and can be thought of as a combination of the previous two figures. 
